---
title: DBC - Paying for an Experiment
date: 2015-07-12
tags: dbc learning
excerpt: In this post, I will touch upon DBC, and the fact that the onus of learning the material resides with the student, not the teacher / program.
---
I didn't watch the entire fireside chat video - though I plan to come back to it
when I have more time. The material that I did see raised a few topics that I
think are important to talk about.

Some folks might be scared about the possibility of shelling out hard-earned
money for the privilege of being guinea pigs. They may prefer a structured
curriculum, as well as a structured environment, that all but ensures they will
be employable after graduating from the program.  Personally, however, I prefer
a program in which students are allowed to take ownership of their education. I
find programming to be a rewarding and interesting activity in its own right. I
have been learning it on my own, and don't think I will run into any problems in
terms of self-motivation. I also believe that individuals learn best if they
find the material interesting. A curriculum that allows its students to own what
and how they learn ensures engagement with the material. This confidence in my
self-motivation to learn the material and in the belief that DBC will ensure we
are exposed to a full stack of technologies makes a hands-off curriculum a great
fit for me.

On another topic, one of the more interesting topics broached during the
fireside chat was individuals who feel that they know too much or not enough. I
find DBC's awareness of this issue and their willingness to bring it up to be a
very positive sign. It shows, to me at least, that they are actively listening
to and observing their students in an attempt to improve the curriculum. It is
also comforting to know that everyone else is feeling these emotions.
